now I'm particularly interested in what
dr. Weaver said about the attitude of
the family to children because we have
an absolutely extraordinary attitude in
our culture and in various other
cultures high civilizations to the new
member of human society instead of
saying thank you to children
how do you do welcome to the human race
we are playing a game and we are playing
by the following rules we want you to we
want to tell you what the rules are so
that you know your way around and when
you've understood what rules we're
playing by when you get older you may be
able to invent better ones but instead
of that we still retain an attitude to
the child that he is on probation he's
not really a human being he's a
candidate for humanity and therefore to
preserve the role of parent or to
preserve the role of teacher you have to
do what they do in the Arthur Murray
school of dancing which is that they
string you out they don't tell you all
the story about dancing because if they
tell you you'll learn in a few weeks and
go away and you'll know it but instead
they want to keep you on and in just
this way we have a whole system of
preparation of the child for life which
always is preparation and never actually
gets there in other words we have a
system of schooling which starts with
grades and we get this little creature
into the thing with a kind of come on
kitty kitty kitty and we get it always
preparing for something that's going to
happen so you go into the nursery school
as preparation for kindergarten you go
to kindergartens preparation for first
grade and then you see you go up the
grades till you get to high school and
then comes a time when maybe if we can
get you fascinated enough with this
system you go to college and then when
you've gone to college if you're smart
you'll get into graduate school and stay
a perpetual student and go back to be a
professor and just go round and round
system but in the ordinary way they
don't encourage quite that they want you
after graduate school or after
graduation commencement as its called
beginning to get out into the world with
a capital W and so you you know you've
been trained for this and now you've
arrived but when you get out into the
world it's your first sales meeting
they've got the same thing going again
because they want you to make that quota
and if you do make it they give you a
higher quota and come along about the 45
years of age maybe you're vice president
and you suddenly dawns on you that
you've arrived with a certain sense that
having been cheated because it isn't
it's just the same as things that life
feels the same as it always felt and you
are conditioned to be in desperate need
of a future so the final goal that this
culture prepares for us is over times
when you will be a senior citizen and
you will have the wealth and the leisure
to do what you've always wanted but you
will at the same time have impotence
rotten prostate and false teeth and no
energy so or all the whole things from
beginning to end is a hoax and
furthermore some other aspects of the
hoax just for kicks you are involved by
and large in a very strange business
system which divides your day into work
and play work is something that
everybody does and you get paid to do it
because nobody could care less about
doing it in other words it is so
abominable and boring that you can get
paid for doing it and the object of
doing this is to make money and the
object of making money is to go home and
enjoy the money that you've made when
you've got it you see you can buy
pleasure and that this is a complete
fallacy money never survive
because all pleasures depend upon not
putting down a symbol of power money but
upon discipline in other words now in
Sausalito where I live
we have pier after pier full of fine
boat motor cruisers sailing boats all
sorts of things which nobody ever uses
because they've been brought on the
falling for the add line that if you buy
this thing you will have pleasure you
will have status you will have something
or other
but then they suddenly discover that
having a boat requires the art of ceylon
ship which is difficult but rewarding
therefore nobody has time for it and all
they do with the boats is have cocktail
parties on them at the weekend
and in in various ways you see you go
home you were the wealthiest people in
the world and you would think that our
having earned your money and go home you
would have an orgy and a great banquet
and so on but nobody does they eat a TV
dinner which is just a warmed-over
airline food and then they spend the
evening looking at an electronic
reproduction of life which is divided
from you by a glass screen you can't
touch it you can't smell it it has no
color except maybe it's a very wealthy
house color but by and large it doesn't
then you look at this thing and you
don't you have a strange feeling you see
that the whole procession of grades that
was leading to something in the future
to that goodie
that gorgeous voluptuous goodie that was
lying at the end of the line it never
quite turns up and this is because from
the beginning we condition our children
to a defective senses identity and this
I think is the most important feature in
the whole thing that a child grows into
our culture and as I repeat this is not
only Western culture it's equally true
in Japan an area which I can speak with
some first-hand knowledge
we condition the child in a way that
sets the child a life problem which is
insoluble and therefore attended by
constant frustration and as a result of
this problem being insoluble it is
perpetually postponed to the future so
that one lives one it's educated to live
in the future and one is not ever
educated to live today now I'm not
saying that you know the philosophy of
carpe diem let us drink today for
tomorrow we die and not make any plans
what I am saying is that making plans
for the future is not used only to
people who are capable of living
completely in the present because when
you make plans for the future and they
mature you are if you can't live in the
present you are not able to enjoy the
future for which you have clamped
because you will have a new a kind of
syndrome a whereby happiness consists in
promises and not in direct and immediate
realisation so long as you feel that
tomorrow it will come be on a dollar
bill at all is this promise to pay it's
a promissory note and nobody ever can
come across because the promise is
tomorrow and does if they if we say in
common speech tomorrow never comes
but everything is based on the idea you
see that you will get it tomorrow and
you can enjoy yourself today
so long as tomorrow looks bright but
Confucius once said a man who
understands the DAO in the morning can
die contentedly in the evening that is
to say if you have ever lived one
complete moment you can be ready to die
you can say well that was it that was
the good that I've had it you see but if
you never live that complete moment
death is always the guy who like comes
into a bar at two o'clock in the morning
and says time gentlemen please and you
say old please one more drink not yet
because you haven't really have the
feeling that you ever had it that you
have a Gawker
now then the main the main factor in
this kind of conditioning seems to me to
be as I said the way in which we give
children a sense of identity and in this
respect we do something extraordinarily
odd we define a person consider this for
a moment this word person Harry Anderson
Fosdick once wrote a book called how to
be a real person and this in translation
means how to be a genuine faith because
the word person means a mask the persona
the mask worn by actors in greco-roman
drama which was a megaphone mask mask so
that through which pair SONA the sound
goes and so at the beginning of a play
script you will see the dramatis
personae the person's of the drama that
is to say the list of the masks that the
actors is aware that the word has so
fallen from its original use that to be
a person has come to mean your real
identity your truce and fear on itself
the person and we say Osama meant he's a
real person
that means he's genuine but we have
confused to see the individual organism
with the person with that is to say its
role and we have defined the role of the
person in such a way that it condemns
everybody so defined to perpetual
frustration now how is the soul
when you are a child you your parents
your peers your teachers your uncles and
aunts are very anxious to define you and
what they are going to tell you is that
you are a free agent you are responsible
that is to say you are an independent
first cause you are an origin of actions
and thoughts and feelings and we can
praise you or blame you for what you do
and above all we require of you that you
love us you love your parents you love
your brothers and sisters as Fred said a
child is not allowed to pay to let that
baby sister go back where it came from
because that is not nice all nice
children love their brothers and sisters
and their parents not of course because
we tell you to do so but because you
would want to do it yourself as we now
hear what's going on you are required
and commanded to do certain things which
will be appreciated only if you do them
voluntarily now you see when you're your
identity is defined by society you
cannot resist it you don't have the
knowledge you don't have the wisdom you
don't have the resources to understand
that something's being put over on you
you cannot but help believe the
definition of you as a free agent but
you believe yourself to be a free agent
as the result is not being free that is
to say of being hopelessly unable to
resist society's identification of you
so in the whole sense of our personality
there is a contradiction and that is why
the sense of ego of being oneself is
simultaneously a sense of frustration
the feeling of eyeness so far as most
people are concerned
is the feeling of tension between the
eyes and behind them driven Poirot
remarkable man did some studies about
two kinds of awareness which he called
attention retention in the attentive is
the normal kind of awareness that we
have of being a skin encapsulated ego of
being separate from the environment and
of confronting an external objective
world of which we are the independent
observer and this miss he said goes hand
in hand with a physical state which is a
state of tension between the eyes
then he defines so tension as another
form of awareness which you might call a
certain kind of openness in which you
realize that the external world is just
as much you as anything inside your skin
and that you are not something that
comes into this world on probation and
doesn't really belong this is you see
the attitude that we foster in the child
but that you are something not that
comes into the world that comes out of
it in the same way as a flower comes out
of a plant or a fruit comes out of a
tree that you are an expression you as a
human being are a symptom of nature and
that you really belong there and that
furthermore your actual self what is
finally and fundamentally you is not a
separate and lonely part of the world
but the real you is the world itself
everything that there is expressing
itself as this particular organism here
and now and of course as you look across
the room has all these other organisms
in there here and now we are all chips
on the same cell and they put it for
prove it or if you want to do it it more
poetically raised from the same fun
now now children very often ask their
parents to see as a result of having
been given this funny sense of identity
mommy who would I have been if my father
had been someone else this is a very
common child question because the child
gets the message from the parent using
the English language the French language
the German language or whatever that I
am somewhat in my body you gave me my
body but who am I to whom this was given
you see you can say to a girl in our
culture darling you're absolutely
gorgeous you're so beautiful and she
says how like a man all you think about
is bodies I may be beautiful but that's
my parents gave me my body but I want to
be admired for myself and not for my
Shafi and this poor girl is a chauffeur
she's alienated from her body and she
doesn't take any credit doesn't assume
any responsibility for being what she is
physically and this is of course as much
true of men as of women this is a common
cultural attitude we say I have a body
we don't say I am the body we feel a
very sharp distinction in other words
between our consciousness which is a
kind of focused attention together with
all those actions that we are able to
perform voluntarily on the one hand and
on the other hand everything both within
us and outside us that seems nearly to
happen to us consider for a moment
breathing do you breathe or are you
breathed you can feel it either way if
you become conscious of breathing you'll
get
sense that you are doing it in the same
way as thinking or walking but if you
forget about it it goes on you don't
have to do it at all that is why
breathing exercises are fundamental in
all meditation practices in the Orient
because you can understand through
breathing and through the experience of
breathing that there really is no
differentiation between the involuntary
experience and the voluntary experience
but when you make setup game rules
whereby you identify all that you do
voluntarily with you and all that
happens involuntarily with the other
with what happens to you and then you
put a gulf between these things not
realizing and this is the secret that is
never given away that self and other are
inseparable just in the same way that
the front in the back of a coin are
different but identical is all one coin
so in exactly the same way the
experience of self and the experience of
other are mutually necessary you
wouldn't know what you meant by self
unless you knew other you wouldn't know
other unless you knew what you meant by
self they are therefore polarities like
north and south pole of a magnet
they're inseparable but that secret
doesn't get out because a civilized
language and thought ignores the fact
that all classes all logical classes and
words are after all labeled on classes
are so constructed that they are
intellectual boxes and every box which
has an inside also must have an outside
and we think that insides exist apart
from outside and outside the part from
inside we don't realize that although
they are opposed they go together and
you see that is the secret of the whole
thing that is what the child is not let
onto and so instead the child is defined
as a stranger in the earth
and not as a symptom of the earth and as
a result of that we have the vast
terrifying social problem of alienation
our feeling that the world outside human
skins is unfeeling fully automatic
stupidity which we have to fight and
dominate otherwise it will swallow us up
and condemn us to the imaginary terrors
of everlasting nothingness now I feel in
a way with it when we say I wasn't
responsible for being born you know in
the one of the great problems of
psychotherapy today is passing the buck
by a kind of superficial Freudian
attitude you as a juvenile delinquent
are not responsible for what you do
because it was your parents who fouled
you up and so they write articles in the
press but then instead of prosecuting
the children we also prosecute the
parents so they hold the parents in the
parents they I know we mixed up that was
the fault of out there and it all goes
back to a guy called Adam and he blamed
it on Eve and she blamed it on the
serpent and God says about the serpent
I'm not responsible for the serpent he
did it on his own seed because the
serpent is the left hand of God and what
we call God Jehovah Jesus Christ as
debtor that's the right hand the Jesus
Christ sits on the right hand of the
Father nobody ever says who sits on the
left because let not your left hand know
what your right hand do it see my temper
got the better of me I didn't really
mean it
my lusts got the better of me I really
not responsible for them they were given
to me you see
now all this idea that you is we were
laboring under a definition of the self
which is extremely limited so that we
for example at knowledge thinking and
walking and we're doing things with our
hands and speaking but we don't
acknowledge that we are growing our hair
and beating our heart that is defined as
happening to us
but is defined as something that happens
to us and we feel that was my father's
responsibility he had a dirty gleam in
his eye and went after my mother and so
on and he did it thank you yes all right
because there is their interest point
about responsibility and one way of
looking at it is should we are really
not responsible for what happened to us
that we are responsible let having to be
like that yes no but you see I feel this
is this is a hoax you see look let's
suppose now that we will follow the
theory of those astronomers who maintain
that the universe is not a steady-state
thing but there was an enormous bang
billions of years ago and from the sang
all the galaxies was thrown out into
space now then you look back at this
that's something which happened in the
past and which is as it were the cause
of the present but what I would say is
that banging still going on when you
take a lovely bottle of black ink and
throw it as hard as you can at a white
wall and smash it all it goes swish like
this you know and in the center it dents
but on the out fringes it has all kinds
of interesting fella cues that's all you
see one splash now in the same way we
are at the moment sitting in this room
and talking and thinking we are all the
little curlicues out on the end of the
original cosmic bang
we are it we're not effects of it
because the to think that you are
separate from the Big Bang is simply a
matter of definition at the way of
talking we separate events from each
other in order to measure them that is
to say the notion that there are
distinct things and distinct events in
the physical world is a calculus
it is like pretending that a curve is a
series of point and so in the same way
supposing you have a wiggle now you've
got a wiggly line you see and the whole
world is wiggly lines clouds mountains
people rivers everything is wiggly line
now how much of a wiggly line is a
wiggle you see what is one wiggle and
you can see that this is a very
arbitrary matter so we see the the more
obvious Wiggles in the world and we
define them as people each of you is a
wiggle and this wiggle is is you know
what about the wheel or the child
fighting to get out of the unit through
the birds now tell me more yeah how do
you use that in the general well apps is
simply a repetition of the original
explosion if you participant right in
the flesh or of course you do this is
the natural expression of the entire
earth yes exactly this is the repetition
of the original explosion go man you see
and it starts with only it stops before
birth because the definition of yourself
as beginning only when shall we put it
where did you begin when at parturition
at conception or when you were the evil
gleam in your father's eyes when did you
begin let's go back you began on the
first dawn of creation whenever that was
that's because you did it see everybody
is pretending they didn't
and you can kind of play a game this is
what gurus do is these n masters and so
on they give you a funny look and you
say well I am problem
please teach others little me and I'm
caught in this thing for life I got
mixed up with all these cubes and nerve
and it's uncomfortable and I don't know
what to do about it because it's all
going to fall apart and so the teacher
says like whether it's Sri Ramana
Maharshi or whether it said then teacher
who is mixed up in this thing who are
you who asked this question show me find
yourself you say well I just as me and
it is all come on
you perfectly laughs see so eventually
the person feels very bugged because the
the teacher is calling his bluff and you
are not the Lord God in the Jehovah
sense of Christianity lose the cosmic
technocrat who knows all the answers to
everything but you are the Lord God in
the Hindu sense who is different because
the Hindu god it doesn't know how he
does everything in the sense that he
doesn't translate it into words he can't
explain it because there's no point in
explaining it you open and close your
hand without knowing how you do it and
yet you will surely do it but you can't
put it into words how it happened unless
you're a physiologist and then even so
it doesn't help you much to open close
your hand better than anybody else see
so you do know how to do it but you
can't explain it because the thing words
are very clumsy way of talking about
something which from the standpoint of
words and the standpoint of logic is a
very very complicated process so the
with you our Shiva how he dances the
cosmos he would say I just do it like
you say well I just open and close my
hand so the Guru says to you
distant Shiva don't kid me you know that
you're not Shiva but they're just a
thing called Mary Smith for John Doe etc
haha and everybody says oh you can't
admit that because you see if I did
admit that I would
have to be considered responsible and I
would be considered crazy and I would
feel that I really was one with this
whole scheme of things and that's you
see the secret that we don't let the
children know in all it well not in all
but in many cultures initiation into
manhood consists precisely in finding
that out they finally get around to
saying to you after all you know we've
been pretending all the time that you
were Justice of a boil it'll go but now
we're going to let you in on the real
story but not in this culture that's the
problem in this culture we do have an
initiation into adult life called
psychoanalysis
and everybody is ruined by education and
then this can't be helped because they
have to know all the conventions and
just like you to preserve beef you make
it sport and when you're going to cook
it you have to serve the salt out of it
so in the same way to make a child
tolerable companion you have to it's
going still you have to be salted with
education then when that mixes up all
your natural instincts you have to be
psychoanalyzed in order to be
straightened out and record of your
education cured of your upbringing but
the difficulty is you see that the
assumptions of psychoanalysis and of a
good deal of psychotherapy in various
types and schools do not include the
insight that you are basically the works
they have in other words of a person -
because historically speaking
psychotherapy originated in the 19th
century and therefore still carries on
the 19th century assumptions about the
nature of the universe and all those
19th century assumptions about the
universe were a put-down they included
the mists you see that the universe
is actually blind energy it is
essentially stupid and man's
intelligence and land values and man's
consciousness are a fluke in the world
and so this myth is that the world the
man in other words is not a symptom of
the world like an apple tree is a
symptom an apple is a symptom of an
apple tree the man is a fluke a kind of
a joke a chant and that to be realistic
and hard-headed under factual in other
words that strong man you must realize
that you are caught in this trap and
face the facts so then this for the West
at any rate this 19th century philosophy
of man was placed in the world and his
identity has become the most plausible
common sense in other words people say
they are Christians they say they are
Jews they say they are theosophist
vedantis footage etc etc but they are
not because they know in our heart of
hearts whatever they choose to believe
that the world is as described in the
19th century myth because that's become
our common sense the people were
Christians there'd be screaming in the
streets and not screaming in the streets
they'll be taking full-page ads there be
sponsoring TV programs about the
tremendous urgency of this Christian fit
and they're not doing anything it's kind
a few Jehovah's Witnesses are doing it
but they are even they are fairly polite
when they come to your front door they
shall no urgency really so they don't
believe it because the plausible myths
of our age is the myths
of the fully automatic model of the
universe in which man is a fluke and
which he doesn't really belong he's a
chance operation and when you're dead
you're dead and that's all there is to
it
that's so plausible that really almost
everyone believes in it without
realizing that it is made out of whole
cloth it's been nothing but a myth so
we're looking at things way of striking
an attitude but this is the powerful
powerful idea that governs our children
and that gives us our sense of basic
identity alienation so that we live
always in expectation of the future
which of course never happens well
enough the reason one
but you see then once we are up against
this the possibility that the
distinction between what we do and what
happens to us is obliterated and
therefore we would say with Hindus and
Buddhists that if I run into a
catastrophe it is my Karma
you see that means far more than that it
is a punishment for something I did
wrong in the past that is a legalistic
view of karma but a naturalistic or
organic view of karma is in fact that
what happens to me is what I do and that
in a certain sense
I want what happens to me we can use one
to notice how we use this word it means
the desire and it means to lack or to
need we say to somebody your wanting
your deficient in something that you
need so it's rather alarming really when
you consider it that you always get what
you want
invariably even though you may think
that it's entirely opposed to your
wishes but is it your Karma
everything that happens to you put it in
another way everything that comes to you
is a return to you of what goes out of
you yes obviously that's absurd if you
confine the definition of yourself to
your voluntary conscious behavior that's
a ridiculous definition of oneself
oneself by any stretch of the
imagination must involve far more than
the conscious and voluntary aspects of
our behavior and if we see that it
involves intimately and inescapably the
behavior of what we call the other the
not-self the environment and see that
these two are moving together like the
two sides of the snake when it swims
then you get a very curious feeling you
have to be careful of it if you've got a
Western background because this is what
happens to a lot of people who play
around the psychedelic chemicals there
are many many cases of inflation among
these people that is to say when you get
this sensation that the two sides of the
world the inside and the outside are
moving together you may think I am
ruling it I am God in the Western sense
of the word therefore your ego instead
of being as it were integrated and
transcended with all this process merely
assumes vast dimensions as megalomania
is blown up by the mystical experience
and so you get the holier-than-thou
people going around who seem to think
that they're above all human conventions
and have no obligations to anyone or
anything because they are divine and
they can do as they damn please
what they haven't realized is that doing
as you will isn't a new kind of behavior
that you suddenly put on and say from
now on I'm going to go around doing as I
will
you have to realize first that that's
what you've always been doing and you
can look at this from a very simple
point of view it's not a complete point
of view but you can say well now what
about the people who who did good and
who did the things that they didn't want
to do you know everybody's mother said
to darling sometimes we have to do
things we don't like what about that
well you can always say the kid debate
the mother undid the thing that it
didn't like because that was the better
part of it in other words if he hadn't
done that something worse would have
happened and we choose the lesser of two
evils and when you find yourself in a
situation
where you have to choose the lesser of
two evils then you say I want out of
here you take the easiest way you take
the line of least resistance so that's
your doing
now you can pursue that more profoundly
when you stop thinking about human
behavior as something that responds to
the compulsion of an environment and you
can get out of that when you see the
behavior of the environment as an
essential aspect of you so it isn't as
it were the environment starting
something which you are therefore
compelled to follow it's the whole
system moving together so then you get
in the state of liberated or mystical
consciousness you very often feel that a
hill is lifting you up as you walk up it
the ground seems to heave beneath your
feet and up you go and you get the
strange feeling of lightness of
effortlessness walking on air never
occur you know this wonderful sense that
there are no obstructions anywhere
there's nothing as it were banging you
and making you do that it all flows
together and it's a very common sense
that's you are actually is in that state
of consciousness you are perceiving the
goings-on the DAO the course of nature
in the way it's happening but in the
ordinary way you've been conditioned to
resist it to fight it and to use those
sensations of resistance to create a
sensory basis for what you describe as
the ego the ego in practice is a sense
of strain when you are aware of I you
are aware of it is basic discomfort
which is located basically between the
eyes somewhere in here a sort of
tightness
also it's in other sense as to its in
the solar plexus and
there are various physical centers in
other words where there's constant
tension or resistance against it is
going on and that's what you feel when
you talk about I web map tension ceases
you discover immediately that the
separate ego has disappeared and that
what I refers to is simply the total
panorama of experience everything that's
happening that's I and I'm obviously I
don't know all of it because I can't
inspect all this with my radar with my
conscious attention that would be a
ridiculous undertaking to know
everything in that sense we know it in a
much better way as we know how to grow
hair and open and close our hands so
this point of view can be understood if
we clarify the initial problems we have
about it and I suppose the first problem
is if we accept the notion that
everything that happens to us is our own
Karma our own doing then we have to be
very careful of shall we say the devil
of omnipotence of inflation of feeling
that your ego is what is in control of
all of us and the second thing is if you
think then that everything that happens
to everybody is what they really want to
happen then you can absolve yourself
from any qualms about being unkind to
someone because you could say well the
unkindness I did you was what you really
wanted wasn't it you know that business
about you the responsibility of the
person who gets murdered for getting
murdered there is a curious sense in
which a lot of people go around looking
for trouble
Freud powerpoints we pointed out by
correctly the psychology of
accident-prone individuals they seem to
be attracting trouble like lights
attraction month
and we're all doing that but we managed
to remain unconscious of it so that we
can praise and blame and play the game
which says that's not my fault that's
your fault and so we go around the
portioning false to everybody because if
we're going to apportion praise for what
the good things people do you can't make
praise mean anything unless you also go
around blaming trays and blame go
together
supposing everybody was acting in a
praiseworthy way and we praised
everybody for everything they'll get
tired of it
they wouldn't even notice it anymore so
so long as you're going to get a kick
out of being praised you've got to go
around blaming - it's very simple but if
you see the folly of that but praising
and blaming are just creating each other
then you don't praise and you don't
blame you just dig the whole thing and
that's why when we encounter very great
sages you never hear them blame people
and they very rarely praise anyone you
try to stop gossip in the presence of
such a person and you make a derogatory
comment about someone it's as if you had
thrown a rock into a well and heard no
splash and the funny feeling because
that you get no response you get no
agreement and if you praise somebody
there's also likely nothing to be said
except perhaps some remark that of
course you're praising the beloved in
all its manifestations and this this
disconcerts some people terribly I've
always noticed that real sages never
gossip never
sighs persons and because they
understand so well
the French saying to compensate to
pavani to understand all is to forgive
all is so true if you are experienced in
just the ordinary way of dealing with
human problems you've been a counselor
or psychotherapist or minister or
anything like that you very soon get to
realize how vastly complicated people
are and to see that they really are in
the message they're in not because of
anything the best way it is and you stop
blaming people and because you don't
blame people you have open ears and
people come to seek your advice they
don't want to come to someone who's a
counselor who will ball them out slight
dentists who simply accept the fact that
people really don't take care of their
teeth and realize that the job of a
dentist is precisely to look after
people who can't be bothered to take
care of their teeth
why is in business so a good dentist
doesn't always patients out because they
didn't do this out in the other just
accept it Shaima doctors they know
perfectly well that nobody's going to
live by the rules of health and they're
very vague as to what they are so
there's every kind of theory about how
you ought to live what is healthy but
they've changed in fashion and what we
ought to eat this kind of diet in 1921
by the time it's nineteen thirty they've
changed their ideas altogether and by
the time it's 1960 it's back again to a
mixture between 1921 and 1894 something
like that is it always changing so while
the rules that are not so see if they
were all absurd it would be easy but
they're not all absurd there's some
truth in it always
but nobody's ever quite sure so the
function of healers and doctors and so
on is just to do what can be done to
stop the mess getting too messy and they
must accept it as that that's their job
if I were healthy say to the doctor I
wouldn't need you so you're in business
now what about it then we have
difficulty in seeing this mutuality of
our relationship to the rest of the
world because it's contrary to common
sense country to the way we've been
brought up and therefore we have at what
I would call an initial intellectual
block to understanding it quite apart
from any emotional blocks or anything
that can but obviously we must overcome
that intellectual block if we're going
to go any further and actually realize
and feel this way of life's working in
this relationship between what you do
and what happens to you then the
question arises then what do I do
do I go around saying to myself all this
that's happening to you is what I wanted
I am inside and outside
I am the subjective and I am the
objective and then I mean is where I'm
thinking thoughts about this so as it
were to talk yourself into this way of
feeling or that's very superficial
because this new sense of relationship
to nature is something much more than an
idea the ecologists and physicists have
the idea that this is so
but they mostly in their private life
and in their ordinary human behavior
just like other people who don't feel it
and who feel themselves in a Newtonian
billiards game even though they've gone
on to quantum mechanics so that there
may be a transition from our ordinary
way our feeling how things go on to the
new way we have to do something other
than think but actually thinking is
causing the trouble it is by thinking
that we divide the world into separate
events and separate things
that is calculus and an under
Kumaraswamy once described the life of
the liberated being as a perpetual
uncalculated life in the present and you
say wow I don't think I could do that
that's saying of Jesus and the Sermon on
the Mount I'll be not anxious for the
morrow the uncalculated life if God so
clothe the grass of the field will he
not much more clothe you faceless ones
and I've never met a preacher yet who
would really take that up they all say
well of course that's too hard a saying
for most of us it's not practical
everybody has to takes off for tomorrow
and calculate well at this point
people can go in two directions there's
one class of people who will say all
right let's live the uncalculated life
let's not make any plans and before you
know where they are they're living a
filthy pad and scrounging around and
living on petty thievery and so on this
is the usual thing this is got into it
the wrong way the first thing to do is
just as I said whether you like it or
not and whether you know it or not the
relationship between you and the
environment is always one that is
harmonious so in the same way you are
always living the uncalculated life you
have to find out first of all that
you're always doing it and that what you
call your calculations and the things
you did were funny little
rationalizations in other words your ego
has about as much control over what goes
on as a child sitting next to father in
a car with a plastic steering wheel that
is turning the car the way that it
drives it because as I pointed out most
of the functions most of the goings on
in you around you the circumstances of
life have nothing to do with your ego at
all and you don't even know why you make
up your mind to do certain things we
know superficially we were few ideas
like when you were enter into a marriage
you have really no control over its
outcome in the ordinary sense of ego
control you've taken a colossal gamble
in which you've involved
enormous complexes of patterns and maybe
it'll come out all right if you don't
interfere with it too much
you know it's like often Hina said it's
perfectly obvious that the whole world
is going to hell and the only possible
way we might stop that happening is not
to try to prevent it you know all these
wars are started out by people who think
that they are helping someone but it's
going to make things better so when you
begin from the basis not off saying I
should now live the spontaneous and
improvident and non calculating style of
life but realize you've always done that
only you rationalize that you didn't you
always did what you wanted to do
basically only you said sometimes it was
my duty but you preferred a conception
of yourself
as someone who always does his duty that
flattered you and so you were still
following your own way now the first
thing then is to see that that's what's
happening so that you don't think well
now there is some special thing I have
to do to understand this harmonious
relationship between the individual in
the world because if you work on it that
way you will start from the
presupposition that that relationship
doesn't already exist and has to be
brought into being thing is it doesn't
have to be brought into being it's there
but now when you see that that so it
obviously starts to make a difference
you do behave in a different way but the
behavior of the new kind of behavior
that is a result of a transformation
is not forced behavior when you try to
imitate the way a feint behaves you have
made a forced change and you know all
forced behavior is phony like someone
saying I love you I love you I love you
when you don't you feel you ought to but
- you don't really and there's something
it doesn't ring true we'll think of the
poor Lord listening to all the prayers
of all those people saying I love you
Jesus and they any knows they don't
think the same is because they think
they ought to and be very trying so
whenever you do a thing like that you
see you make a forced change now if the
change is to happen in the same way
there's a seed at proper season breaks
open and sends up a shoot see it comes
from the whole force of life itself now
when you see that without your having to
do anything
see you are living the uncalculated life
and you're only pretending you're
calculating it arranging it then as it
were you will have a grasp of the total
situation and it will you can allow it
to produce changes in action which are
not forced so this is why there is
always a trend in every kind of
spiritual doctrine which says something
about grace divine grace there must come
about something in you a change which
you can't produce and if you try to
produce it you will be a victim of
spiritual pride but on the other hand
all teachers are universities saying
you've got to make an effort there are
some discipline there is some something
you must do well that's the only way to
get it across to people
that you as a separate effort maker are
a myth
our phantasm because if you really try
to control your mind and only think the
thoughts that you think of good thoughts
to think you will find that you're going
around in a circle
Krishnamurthy is awfully good at
pointing this out when he people ask him
how do you meditate he says why do you
want to meditate
why are you concentrating why you saying
prayers why do you think you should
believe in God and it always comes up
because I'm just a son of a bitch I mean
I'm up for my own good and this seems to
be the it would be the way so he says
you see you don't have any genuine love
at all it's all fake and so you have to
find first of all where the genuine love
is now you love you don't you that's
genuine we won't argue about that but
then when you start from this I gave a
talk some time ago to them the air force
their camera was lab where they make
weapons do all the research and they got
a bunch of us there who were ministers
and philosophers and they had the nerve
to ask us what was our basis for moral
behavior personal moral behavior well I
said my basis for moral behavior is pure
selfishness and I'm talking after all to
realistic people here and I don't think
we need me sentimental and beat about
the bush so all you're all warriors and
fighters and so on and you know how
rough things are so I'm going to say to
you frankly uh I'm out for me the cross
I don't do it in a tactless way I don't
go around and hit people over the head
and say give me this give me that I much
more subtle I say
good manners and please and how nice you
all are and so on and finally people
feel massage psychologically it's the
state where they'll give but they're not
the stuff that happens and things that
bother me your first one is if I love me
what do I want and for the more Who am I
cause if I'm going to be realistic about
getting what I want I got to be pretty
sure what it is that's me and what is
the state of desire in me is I am desire
see if I am a center of desire what's it
all for
well I think of all the things I want
what it sho turns out that none of them
are mean we've actually I want dinner
but I mean I'm going to eat me up if I
any pleasure I can think of is the
enjoyment of something that I haven't
thought of defining as myself because I
like my sensations like what happens to
my body when I take a fine wine and down
it but then what's the difference
between my body and the wine I say I
like the wine I also mean I like me and
the wine together the mixture then I
don't eat you or a friend or a lover in
the same way as I drink wine I live in
association and like this but then I'm
loving things that aren't formally
supposed to be me and as I go into it in
other words as I investigate what I mean
by me I find that I can put any limit on
it that I cannot experience me without
you or without the other
they're inseparable but you don't find
this out until you investigators until
you really go into the question what do
I want and that's the most important
investigation anyone can make which I'm
going to into in the next session the
question of power and all these military
men you think they're they think they
won't come and so I said to them some
very subversive and undermining things
without anybody knowing it until long
after I'd left this is session one of
the you do it for this in two years
without one program continues with
session two
you